---
title: Using Datagrams with HTTP
abbrev: HTTP Datagrams
docname: draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram-latest
category: std
wg: MASQUE

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: "D. Schinazi"
    name: "David Schinazi"
    organization: "Google LLC"
    street: "1600 Amphitheatre Parkway"
    city: "Mountain View, California 94043"
    country: "United States of America"
    email: dschinazi.ietf@gmail.com

 -
    ins: "L. Pardue"
    name: "Lucas Pardue"
    organization: "Cloudflare"
    email: lucaspardue.24.7@gmail.com


--- abstract

The QUIC DATAGRAM extension provides application protocols running over QUIC
with a mechanism to send unreliable data while leveraging the security and
congestion-control properties of QUIC. However, QUIC DATAGRAM frames do not
provide a means to demultiplex application contexts. This document describes how
to use QUIC DATAGRAM frames when the application protocol running over QUIC is
HTTP/3. It associates datagrams with client-initiated bidirectional streams
and defines an optional additional demultiplexing layer. Additionally, this
document defines how to convey datagrams over prior versions of HTTP.


--- middle

# Introduction {#intro}

The QUIC DATAGRAM extension {{!DGRAM=I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}} provides
application protocols running over QUIC {{!QUIC=RFC9000}} with a mechanism to
send unreliable data while leveraging the security and congestion-control
properties of QUIC. However, QUIC DATAGRAM frames do not provide a means to
demultiplex application contexts. This document describes how to use QUIC
DATAGRAM frames when the application protocol running over QUIC is HTTP/3
{{!H3=I-D.ietf-quic-http}}. It associates datagrams with client-initiated
bidirectional streams and defines an optional additional demultiplexing layer.
Additionally, this document defines how to convey datagrams over prior versions
of HTTP.


## Conventions and Definitions {#defs}

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}}
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.


# Multiplexing

When running over HTTP/3, multiple exchanges of datagrams need the ability to
coexist on a given QUIC connection. To allow this, HTTP datagrams contain two
layers of multiplexing. First, the QUIC DATAGRAM frame payload starts with an
encoded stream identifier that associates the datagram with a given QUIC
stream. Second, datagrams optionally carry a context identifier (see
{{datagram-contexts}}) that allows multiplexing multiple datagram contexts
related to a given HTTP request. Conceptually, the first layer of multiplexing
is per-hop, while the second is end-to-end.

When running over HTTP/2, the first level of demultiplexing is provided by the
HTTP/2 framing layer. When running over HTTP/1, requests are strictly
serialized in the connection, therefore the first layer of demultiplexing is
not needed.


## Datagram Contexts {#datagram-contexts}

Within the scope of a given HTTP request, contexts provide an additional
demultiplexing layer. Contexts determine the encoding of datagrams, and can be
used to implicitly convey metadata. For example, contexts can be used for
compression to elide some parts of the datagram: the context identifier then
maps to a compression context that the receiver can use to reconstruct the
elided data.

Contexts are optional, whether to use them or not is decided by the client on
each request stream using registration capsules, see {{register-capsule}} and
{{register-no-context-capsule}}. When contexts are used, they are identified
within the scope of a given request by a numeric value, referred to as the
context ID. A context ID is a 62-bit integer (0 to 2<sup>62</sup>-1).

While stream IDs are a per-hop concept, context IDs are an end-to-end concept.
In other words, if a datagram travels through one or more intermediaries on its
way from client to server, the stream ID will most likely change from hop to
hop, but the context ID will remain the same. Context IDs are opaque to
intermediaries.


## Datagram Formats {#datagram-formats}

When an endpoint registers a datagram context (or the lack of contexts), it
communicates the format (i.e., the semantics and encoding) of datagrams sent
using this context. This is acccomplished by sending a Datagram Format Type as
part of the registration capsule, see {{register-capsule}} and
{{register-no-context-capsule}}. This type identifier is registered with IANA
(see {{iana-format-types}}) and allows applications that use HTTP Datagrams to
indicate what the content of datagrams are. Registration capsules carry a
Datagram Format Additional Data field which allows sending some additional
information that would impact the format of datagrams.

For example, a protocol which proxies IP packets can define a Datagram Format
Type which represents an IP packet. The corresponding Datagram Format
Additional Data field would be empty. An extension to such a protocol that
wishes to compress IP addresses could define a distinct Datagram Format Type
and exchange two IP addresses via the Datagram Format Additional Data field.
Then any datagrams with that type would contain the IP packet with addresses
elided.


## Context ID Allocation {#context-id-alloc}

Implementations of HTTP Datagrams MUST provide a context ID allocation service.
That service will allow applications co-located with HTTP to request a unique
context ID that they can subsequently use for their own purposes. The HTTP
implementation will then parse the context ID of incoming HTTP Datagrams and
use it to deliver the frame to the appropriate application context.

Even-numbered context IDs are client-initiated, while odd-numbered context IDs
are server-initiated. This means that an HTTP client implementation of the
context ID allocation service MUST only provide even-numbered IDs, while a
server implementation MUST only provide odd-numbered IDs. Note that, once
allocated, any context ID can be used by both client and server - only
allocation carries separate namespaces to avoid requiring synchronization.
Additionally, note that the context ID namespace is tied to a given HTTP
request: it is possible for the same numeral context ID to be used
simultaneously in distinct requests.


# HTTP/3 DATAGRAM Format {#format}

When used with HTTP/3, the Datagram Data field of QUIC DATAGRAM frames uses the
following format (using the notation from the "Notational Conventions" section
of {{QUIC}}):

~~~
HTTP/3 Datagram {
  Quarter Stream ID (i),
  [Context ID (i)],
  HTTP Datagram Payload (..),
}
~~~
{: #h3-datagram-format title="HTTP/3 DATAGRAM Format"}

Quarter Stream ID:

: A variable-length integer that contains the value of the client-initiated
bidirectional stream that this datagram is associated with, divided by four (the
division by four stems from the fact that HTTP requests are sent on
client-initiated bidirectional streams, and those have stream IDs that are
divisible by four.). The largest legal QUIC stream ID value is 2<sup>62</sup>-1,
so the largest legal value of Quarter Stream ID is 2<sup>62</sup>-1 / 4.
Receipt of a frame that includes a larger value MUST be treated as a connection
error of type FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.

Context ID:

: A variable-length integer indicating the context ID of the datagram (see
{{datagram-contexts}}). Whether or not this field is present depends on which
registration capsules were exchanged on the associated stream: if a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule (see {{register-capsule}}) has been sent or
received on this stream, then the field is present; if a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule (see {{register-no-context-capsule}}) has
been sent or received, then this field is absent; if neither has been sent or
received, then it is not yet possible to parse this datagram and the receiver
MUST either drop that datagram silently or buffer it temporarily while awaiting
the registration capsule.

HTTP Datagram Payload:

: The payload of the datagram, whose semantics are defined by individual
applications. Note that this field can be empty.

Intermediaries parse the Quarter Stream ID field in order to associate the QUIC
DATAGRAM frame with a stream. If an intermediary receives a QUIC DATAGRAM frame
whose payload is too short to allow parsing the Quarter Stream ID field, the
intermediary MUST treat it as an HTTP/3 connection error of type
H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR. The Context ID field is optional and whether it is
present or not is decided end-to-end by the client, see
{{register-no-context-capsule}}. Therefore intermediaries cannot know whether
the Context ID field is present or absent and they MUST ignore any HTTP/3
Datagram fields after the Quarter Stream ID.

Endpoints parse both the Quarter Stream ID field and the Context ID field in
order to associate the QUIC DATAGRAM frame with a stream and context within
that stream. If an endpoint receives a QUIC DATAGRAM frame whose payload is too
short to allow parsing the Quarter Stream ID field, the endpoint MUST treat it
as an HTTP/3 connection error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR. If an endpoint
receives a QUIC DATAGRAM frame whose payload is long enough to allow parsing
the Quarter Stream ID field but too short to allow parsing the Context ID
field, the endpoint MUST abruptly terminate the corresponding stream with a
stream error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Endpoints MUST NOT send HTTP/3 datagrams unless the corresponding stream's send
side is open. On a given endpoint, once the receive side of a stream is closed,
incoming datagrams for this stream are no longer expected so the endpoint can
release related state. Endpoints MAY keep state for a short time to account for
reordering. Once the state is released, the endpoint MUST silently drop
received associated datagrams.

If an HTTP/3 datagram is received and its Quarter Stream ID maps to a stream
that has not yet been created, the receiver SHALL either drop that datagram
silently or buffer it temporarily while awaiting the creation of the
corresponding stream.


# Capsules {#capsule}

This specification introduces the Capsule Protocol. The Capsule Protocol is a
sequence of type-length-value tuples that allows endpoints to reliably
communicate request-related information end-to-end, even in the presence of
HTTP intermediaries.


## Capsule Protocol {#capsule-protocol}

This specification defines the "data stream" of an HTTP request as the
bidirectional stream of bytes that follow the headers in both directions. In
HTTP/1.x, the data stream consists of all bytes on the connection that follow
the blank line that concludes either the request header section, or the 2xx
(Successful) response header section. In HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, the data stream of
a given HTTP request consists of all bytes sent in DATA frames with the
corresponding stream ID. The concept of a data stream is particularly relevant
for methods such as CONNECT where there is no HTTP message content after the
headers.

Definitions of new HTTP Methods or of new HTTP Upgrade Tokens can state that
their data stream uses the Capsule Protocol. If they do so, that means that the
contents of their data stream uses the following format (using the notation
from the "Notational Conventions" section of {{QUIC}}):

~~~
Capsule Protocol {
  Capsule (..) ...,
}
~~~
{: #capsule-stream-format title="Capsule Protocol Stream Format"}

~~~
Capsule {
  Capsule Type (i),
  Capsule Length (i),
  Capsule Value (..),
}
~~~
{: #capsule-format title="Capsule Format"}

Capsule Type:

: A variable-length integer indicating the Type of the capsule. Endpoints that
receive a capsule with an unknown Capsule Type MUST silently skip over that
capsule.

Capsule Length:

: The length of the Capsule Value field following this field, encoded as a
variable-length integer. Note that this field can have a value of zero.

Capsule Value:

: The payload of this capsule. Its semantics are determined by the value of the
Capsule Type field.


## Requirements

If the definition of an HTTP Method or HTTP Upgrade Token states that it uses
the capsule protocol, its implementations MUST follow the following
requirements:

* A server MUST NOT send any Transfer-Encoding or Content-Length header fields
  in a 2xx (Successful) response. If a client receives a Content-Length or
  Transfer-Encoding header fields in a successful response, it MUST treat that
  response as malformed.

* A request message does not have content.

* A successful response message does not have content.

* Responses are not cacheable.

## Intermediary Processing

Intermediaries MUST operate in one of the two following modes:

Pass-through mode:

: In this mode, the intermediary forwards the data stream between two
associated streams without any modification of the data stream.

Participant mode:

: In this mode, the intermediary terminates the data stream and parses all
Capsule Type and Capsule Length fields it receives.

Each Capsule Type determines whether it is opaque or transparent to
intermediaries in participant mode: opaque capsules are forwarded unmodified
while transparent ones can be parsed, added, or removed by intermediaries.
Intermediaries MAY modify the contents of the Capsule Data field of transparent
capsule types.

Unless otherwise specified, all Capsule Types are defined as opaque to
intermediaries. Intermediaries MUST forward all received opaque CAPSULE frames
in their unmodified entirety. Intermediaries MUST NOT send any opaque CAPSULE
frames other than the ones it is forwarding. All Capsule Types defined in this
document are opaque, with the exception of the DATAGRAM Capsule, see
{{datagram-capsule}}. Definitions of new Capsule Types MAY specify that the
newly introduced type is transparent. Intermediaries MUST treat unknown Capsule
Types as opaque.

Intermediaries respect the order of opaque CAPSULE frames: if an intermediary
receives two opaque CAPSULE frames in a given order, it MUST forward them in
the same order.

Endpoints which receive a Capsule with an unknown Capsule Type MUST silently
drop that Capsule.


## Capsule Types

### The REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule {#register-capsule}

The REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule (see {{iana-types}} for the value of the
capsule type) allows an endpoint to inform its peer of the encoding and
semantics of datagrams associated with a given context ID.

~~~
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule {
  Type (i) = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT,
  Length (i),
  Context ID (i),
  Datagram Format Type (i),
  Datagram Format Additional Data (..),
}
~~~
{: #register-capsule-format title="REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule Format"}

Context ID:

: The context ID to register.

Datagram Format Type:

: A variable-length integer that defines the semantics and encoding of the HTTP
Datagram Payload field of datagrams with this context ID, see
{{datagram-formats}}.

Datagram Format Additional Data:

: This field carries additional information that impact the format of datagrams
with this context ID, see {{datagram-formats}}.

Note that these registrations are unilateral and bidirectional: the sender of
the frame unilaterally defines the semantics it will apply to the datagrams it
sends and receives using this context ID. Once a context ID is registered, it
can be used in both directions.

Endpoints MUST NOT send DATAGRAM frames using a Context ID until they have
either sent or received a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule with the same
Context ID. However, reordering can cause DATAGRAM frames to be received with an
unknown Context ID. Receipt of such frames MUST NOT be treated as an error.
Endpoints SHALL drop the DATAGRAM frame silently, or buffer it temporarily while
awaiting the corresponding REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule. Intermediaries
SHALL drop the DATAGRAM frame silently, MAY buffer it, or forward it on
immediately.

Endpoints MUST NOT register the same Context ID twice on the same stream. This
also applies to Context IDs that have been closed using a
CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule. Clients MUST NOT register server-initiated
Context IDs and servers MUST NOT register client-initiated Context IDs. If an
endpoint receives a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule that violates one or more
of these requirements, the endpoint MUST abruptly terminate the corresponding
stream with a stream error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Servers MUST NOT send a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule on a stream before
they have received at least one REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule or one
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule from the client on that stream. This
ensures that clients control whether datagrams are allowed for a given request.
If a client receives a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule on a stream where the
client has not yet sent a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule, the client MUST
abruptly terminate the corresponding stream with a stream error of type
H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Servers MUST NOT send a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule on a stream where it
has received a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule. If a client receives a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule on a stream where the client has sent a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule, the client MUST abruptly terminate the
corresponding stream with a stream error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.


### The REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT Capsule {#register-no-context-capsule}

The REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule (see {{iana-types}} for the value of
the capsule type) allows a client to inform the server that datagram contexts
will not be used with this stream. It also informs the server of the encoding
and semantics of datagrams associated with this stream.

~~~
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT Capsule {
  Type (i) = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT,
  Length (i),
  Datagram Format Type (i),
  Datagram Format Additional Data (..),
}
~~~
{: #register-no-context-capsule-format title="REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT Capsule Format"}

Datagram Format Type:

: A variable-length integer that defines the semantics and encoding of the HTTP
Datagram Payload field of datagrams, see {{datagram-formats}}.

Datagram Format Additional Data:

: This field carries additional information that impact the format of
datagrams, see {{datagram-formats}}.

Note that this registration is unilateral and bidirectional: the client
unilaterally defines the semantics it will apply to the datagrams it sends and
receives with this stream.

Endpoints MUST NOT send DATAGRAM frames without a Context ID until they have
either sent or received a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT Capsule. However, due to
reordering, an endpoint that receives a DATAGRAM frame before receiving either
a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule or a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule
MUST NOT treat it as an error, it SHALL instead drop the DATAGRAM frame
silently, or buffer it temporarily while awaiting a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule or the corresponding
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule.

Servers MUST NOT send the REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule. If a client
receives a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule, the client MUST abruptly
terminate the corresponding stream with a stream error of type
H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Clients MUST NOT send more than one REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule on a
stream. If a server receives a second REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule on
the same stream, the server MUST abruptly terminate the corresponding stream
with a stream error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Clients MUST NOT send both REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsules and
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsules on the same stream. If a server receives
both a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule and a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT
capsule on the same stream, the server MUST abruptly terminate the
corresponding stream with a stream error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Extensions MAY define a different mechanism to communicate whether contexts are
in use, and they MAY do so in a way which is opaque to intermediaries.


### The CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule {#close-capsule}

The CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule (see {{iana-types}} for the value of the
capsule type) allows an endpoint to inform its peer that it will no longer send
or parse received datagrams associated with a given context ID.

~~~
CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule {
  Type (i) = CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT,
  Length (i),
  Context ID (i),
  Close Code (i),
  Close Details (..),
}
~~~
{: #close-capsule-format title="CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT Capsule Format"}

Context ID:

: The context ID to close.

Close Code:

: The close code allows an endpoint to provide additional information as to why
a datagram context was closed. The codes are defined in {{close-codes}}.

Close Details:

: This is meant for debugging purposes. It consists of a human-readable string
encoded in UTF-8.

Note that this close is unilateral and bidirectional: the sender of the frame
unilaterally informs its peer of the closure. Endpoints can use
CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsules to close a context that was initially
registered by either themselves, or by their peer. Endpoints MAY use the
CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule to immediately reject a context that was just
registered using a REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule if they find its Datagram
Format Type field to be unacceptable.

After an endpoint has either sent or received a CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT frame,
it MUST NOT send any DATAGRAM frames with that Context ID. However, due to
reordering, an endpoint that receives a DATAGRAM frame with a closed Context ID
MUST NOT treat it as an error, it SHALL instead drop the DATAGRAM frame
silently.

Endpoints MUST NOT close a Context ID that was not previously registered.
Endpoints MUST NOT close a Context ID that has already been closed. If an
endpoint receives a CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule that violates one or more of
these requirements, the endpoint MUST abruptly terminate the corresponding
stream with a stream error of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.


#### Close Codes {#close-codes}

This specification defines the close codes below. Their numeric values are in
{{iana-close-codes}}.

NO_ERROR:

: This indicates that the registration was closed without any additional
information.

UNKNOWN_FORMAT:

: This indicates that the sender does not know how to interpret the datagram
format type associated with this context. The endpoint that had originally
registered this context MUST NOT try to register another context with the same
datagram format type on this stream.

DENIED:

: This indicates that the sender has rejected the context registration based on
its local policy. The endpoint that had originally registered this context MUST
NOT try to register another context with the same datagram format type and
datagram format data on this stream.

RESOURCE_LIMIT:

: This indicates that the context was closed to save resources. The recipient
SHOULD limit its future registration of resource-intensive contexts.

Receipt of an unknown close code MUST be treated as if the NO_ERROR code was
present. Close codes are registered with IANA, see {{iana-close-codes}}.


### The DATAGRAM Capsule {#datagram-capsule}

The DATAGRAM capsule (see {{iana-types}} for the value of the capsule type)
allows an endpoint to send a datagram frame over an HTTP stream. This is
particularly useful when using a version of HTTP that does not support QUIC
DATAGRAM frames.

~~~
DATAGRAM Capsule {
  Type (i) = DATAGRAM,
  Length (i),
  [Context ID (i)],
  HTTP Datagram Payload (..),
}
~~~
{: #datagram-capsule-format title="DATAGRAM Capsule Format"}

Context ID:

: A variable-length integer indicating the context ID of the datagram (see
{{datagram-contexts}}). Whether or not this field is present depends on which
registration capsules were exchanged on the associated stream: if a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT capsule (see {{register-capsule}}) has been sent or
received on this stream, then the field is present; if a
REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT capsule (see {{register-no-context-capsule}}) has
been sent or received, then this field is absent; if neither has been sent or
received, then it is not yet possible to parse this datagram and the receiver
MUST either drop that datagram silently or buffer it temporarily while awaiting
the registration capsule.

HTTP Datagram Payload:

: The payload of the datagram, whose semantics are defined by individual
applications. Note that this field can be empty.

Datagrams sent using the DATAGRAM Capsule have the exact same semantics as
datagrams sent in QUIC DATAGRAM frames. In particular, the restrictions on when
it is allowed to send an HTTP Datagram and how to process them from {{format}}
also apply to HTTP Datagrams sent and received using the DATAGRAM capsule.

The DATAGRAM Capsule is transparent to intermediaries, meaning that
intermediaries MAY parse it and send DATAGRAM Capsules that they did not
receive. This allows an intermediary to reencode HTTP Datagrams as it forwards
them: in other words, an intermediary MAY send a DATAGRAM Capsule to forward an
HTTP Datagram which was received in a QUIC DATAGRAM frame, and vice versa.

Note that while DATAGRAM capsules are sent on a stream, intermediaries can
reencode HTTP Datagrams into QUIC DATAGRAM frames over the next hop, and those
could be dropped. Because of this, applications have to always consider HTTP
Datagrams to be unreliable, even if they were initially sent in a capsule.

If an intermediary receives an HTTP Datagram in a QUIC DATAGRAM frame and is
forwarding it on a connection that supports QUIC DATAGRAM frames, the
intermediary SHOULD NOT convert that HTTP Datagram to a DATAGRAM capsule. If
the HTTP Datagram is too large to fit in a DATAGRAM frame (for example because
the path MTU of that QUIC connection is too low or if the maximum UDP payload
size advertised on that connection is too low), the intermediary SHOULD drop
the HTTP Datagram instead of converting it to a DATAGRAM capsule. This
preserves the end-to-end unreliability characteristic that methods such as
Datagram Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery (DPLPMTUD) depend on
{{?RFC8899}}. An intermediary that converts QUIC DATAGRAM frames to DATAGRAM
capsules allows HTTP Datagrams to be arbitrarily large without suffering any
loss; this can misrepresent the true path properties, defeating methods such a
DPLPMTUD.


# The H3_DATAGRAM HTTP/3 SETTINGS Parameter {#setting}

Implementations of HTTP/3 that support HTTP Datagrams can indicate that to
their peer by sending the H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS parameter with a value of 1.
The value of the H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS parameter MUST be either 0 or 1. A value
of 0 indicates that HTTP Datagrams are not supported. An endpoint that receives
the H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS parameter with a value that is neither 0 or 1 MUST
terminate the connection with error H3_SETTINGS_ERROR.

Endpoints MUST NOT send QUIC DATAGRAM frames until they have both sent and
received the H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS parameter with a value of 1.

When clients use 0-RTT, they MAY store the value of the server's H3_DATAGRAM
SETTINGS parameter. Doing so allows the client to send QUIC DATAGRAM frames in
0-RTT packets. When servers decide to accept 0-RTT data, they MUST send a
H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS parameter greater than or equal to the value they sent to
the client in the connection where they sent them the NewSessionTicket message.
If a client stores the value of the H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS parameter with their
0-RTT state, they MUST validate that the new value of the H3_DATAGRAM SETTINGS
parameter sent by the server in the handshake is greater than or equal to the
stored value; if not, the client MUST terminate the connection with error
H3_SETTINGS_ERROR. In all cases, the maximum permitted value of the H3_DATAGRAM
SETTINGS parameter is 1.


## Note About Draft Versions

\[\[RFC editor: please remove this section before publication.]]

Some revisions of this draft specification use a different value (the
Identifier field of a Setting in the HTTP/3 SETTINGS frame) for the H3_DATAGRAM
Settings Parameter. This allows new draft revisions to make incompatible
changes. Multiple draft versions MAY be supported by either endpoint in a
connection. Such endpoints MUST send multiple values for H3_DATAGRAM. Once an
endpoint has sent and received SETTINGS, it MUST compute the intersection of
the values it has sent and received, and then it MUST select and use the most
recent draft version from the intersection set. This ensures that both
endpoints negotiate the same draft version.


# Prioritization

Prioritization of HTTP/3 datagrams is not defined in this document. Future
extensions MAY define how to prioritize datagrams, and MAY define signaling to
allow endpoints to communicate their prioritization preferences.


# Security Considerations {#security}

Since this feature requires sending an HTTP/3 Settings parameter, it "sticks
out". In other words, probing clients can learn whether a server supports this
feature. Implementations that support this feature SHOULD always send this
Settings parameter to avoid leaking the fact that there are applications using
HTTP/3 datagrams enabled on this endpoint.


# IANA Considerations {#iana}

## HTTP/3 SETTINGS Parameter {#iana-setting}

This document will request IANA to register the following entry in the
"HTTP/3 Settings" registry:

| Setting Name |   Value  | Specification | Default |
|:-------------|:---------|:--------------|:--------|
| H3_DATAGRAM  | 0xffd277 | This Document |    0    |
{: #iana-setting-table title="New HTTP/3 Settings"}


## Capsule Types {#iana-types}

This document establishes a registry for HTTP capsule type codes. The "HTTP
Capsule Types" registry governs a 62-bit space. Registrations in this registry
MUST include the following fields:

Type:

A name or label for the capsule type.

Value:

: The value of the Capsule Type field (see {{capsule-protocol}}) is a 62bit
integer.

Reference:

: An optional reference to a specification for the type. This field MAY be
empty.

Registrations follow the "First Come First Served" policy (see Section 4.4 of
{{!IANA-POLICY=RFC8126}}) where two registrations MUST NOT have the same Type.

This registry initially contains the following entries:

| Capsule Type                 |   Value   | Specification |
|:-----------------------------|:----------|:--------------|
| DATAGRAM                     | 0xff37a0  | This Document |
| REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT    | 0xff37a1  | This Document |
| REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT | 0xff37a2  | This Document |
| CLOSE_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT       | 0xff37a3  | This Document |
{: #iana-types-table title="Initial Capsule Types Registry Entries"}

Capsule types with a value of the form 41 * N + 23 for integer values of N are
reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown capsule types be ignored.
These capsules have no semantics and can carry arbitrary values. These values
MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT appear in the listing of assigned
values.


## Datagram Format Types {#iana-format-types}

This document establishes a registry for HTTP datagram format type codes. The
"HTTP Datagram Format Types" registry governs a 62-bit space. Registrations in
this registry MUST include the following fields:

Type:

A name or label for the datagram format type.

Value:

: The value of the Datagram Format Type field (see {{datagram-formats}}) is a
62bit integer.

Reference:

: An optional reference to a specification for the parameter. This field MAY be
empty.

Registrations follow the "First Come First Served" policy (see Section 4.4 of
{{!IANA-POLICY=RFC8126}}) where two registrations MUST NOT have the same Type
nor Value.

This registry is initially empty.

Datagram format types with a value of the form 41 * N + 17 for integer values
of N are reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown datagram format
types be ignored. These format types have no semantics and can carry arbitrary
values. These values MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT appear in the
listing of assigned values.


## Context Close Codes {#iana-close-codes}

This document establishes a registry for HTTP context close codes. The "HTTP
Context Close Codes" registry governs a 62-bit space. Registrations in this
registry MUST include the following fields:

Type:

A name or label for the close code.

Value:

: The value of the Close Code field (see {{close-capsule}}) is a 62bit integer.

Reference:

: An optional reference to a specification for the parameter. This field MAY be
empty.

Registrations follow the "First Come First Served" policy (see Section 4.4 of
{{!IANA-POLICY=RFC8126}}) where two registrations MUST NOT have the same Type
nor Value.

This registry initially contains the following entries:

| Context Close Code           |   Value   | Specification |
|:-----------------------------|:----------|:--------------|
| NO_ERROR                     | 0xff78a0  | This Document |
| UNKNOWN_FORMAT               | 0xff78a1  | This Document |
| DENIED                       | 0xff78a2  | This Document |
| RESOURCE_LIMIT               | 0xff78a3  | This Document |
{: #iana-close-codes-table title="Initial Context Close Code Registry Entries"}

Context close codes with a value of the form 41 * N + 19 for integer values of
N are reserved to exercise the requirement that unknown context close codes be
treated as NO_ERROR. These values MUST NOT be assigned by IANA and MUST NOT
appear in the listing of assigned values.


--- back

# Examples

## CONNECT-UDP

~~~
Client                                             Server

STREAM(44): HEADERS             -------->
  :method = CONNECT-UDP
  :scheme = https
  :path = /
  :authority = target.example.org:443

STREAM(44): DATA                -------->
  Capsule Type = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT
  Context ID = 0
  Datagram Format Type = UDP_PAYLOAD
  Datagram Format Additional Data = ""

DATAGRAM                        -------->
  Quarter Stream ID = 11
  Context ID = 0
  Payload = Encapsulated UDP Payload

           <--------  STREAM(44): HEADERS
                        :status = 200

/* Wait for target server to respond to UDP packet. */

           <--------  DATAGRAM
                        Quarter Stream ID = 11
                        Context ID = 0
                        Payload = Encapsulated UDP Payload
~~~


## CONNECT-UDP with Timestamp Extension

~~~
Client                                             Server

STREAM(44): HEADERS            -------->
  :method = CONNECT-UDP
  :scheme = https
  :path = /
  :authority = target.example.org:443

STREAM(44): DATA               -------->
  Capsule Type = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT
  Context ID = 0
  Datagram Format Type = UDP_PAYLOAD
  Datagram Format Additional Data = ""

DATAGRAM                       -------->
  Quarter Stream ID = 11
  Context ID = 0
  Payload = Encapsulated UDP Payload

           <--------  STREAM(44): HEADERS
                        :status = 200

/* Wait for target server to respond to UDP packet. */

           <--------  DATAGRAM
                        Quarter Stream ID = 11
                        Context ID = 0
                        Payload = Encapsulated UDP Payload


STREAM(44): DATA               -------->
  Capsule Type = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT
  Context ID = 2
  Datagram Format Type = UDP_PAYLOAD_WITH_TIMESTAMP
  Datagram Format Additional Data = ""

DATAGRAM                       -------->
  Quarter Stream ID = 11
  Context ID = 2
  Payload = Encapsulated UDP Payload With Timestamp
~~~


## CONNECT-IP with IP compression

~~~
Client                                             Server

STREAM(44): HEADERS            -------->
  :method = CONNECT-IP
  :scheme = https
  :path = /
  :authority = proxy.example.org:443

           <--------  STREAM(44): HEADERS
                        :status = 200

/* Exchange CONNECT-IP configuration information. */

STREAM(44): DATA                -------->
  Capsule Type = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT
  Context ID = 0
  Datagram Format Type = IP_PACKET
  Datagram Format Additional Data = ""

DATAGRAM                       -------->
  Quarter Stream ID = 11
  Context ID = 0
  Payload = Encapsulated IP Packet

/* Endpoint happily exchange encapsulated IP packets */
/* using Quarter Stream ID 11 and Context ID 0.      */

DATAGRAM                       -------->
  Quarter Stream ID = 11
  Context ID = 0
  Payload = Encapsulated IP Packet

/* After performing some analysis on traffic patterns, */
/* the client decides it wants to compress a 2-tuple.  */


STREAM(44): DATA                -------->
  Capsule Type = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_CONTEXT
  Context ID = 2
  Datagram Format Type = COMPRESSED_IP_PACKET
  Datagram Format Additional Data = "192.0.2.6,192.0.2.7"

DATAGRAM                       -------->
  Quarter Stream ID = 11
  Context ID = 2
  Payload = Compressed IP Packet
~~~


## WebTransport

~~~
Client                                             Server

STREAM(44): HEADERS            -------->
  :method = CONNECT
  :scheme = https
  :method = webtransport
  :path = /hello
  :authority = webtransport.example.org:443
  Origin = https://www.example.org:443

STREAM(44): DATA                -------->
  Capsule Type = REGISTER_DATAGRAM_NO_CONTEXT
  Datagram Format Type = WEBTRANSPORT_DATAGRAM
  Datagram Format Additional Data = ""

           <--------  STREAM(44): HEADERS
                        :status = 200

/* Both endpoints can now send WebTransport datagrams. */
~~~


# Acknowledgments {#acks}
{:numbered="false"}

The DATAGRAM context identifier was previously part of the DATAGRAM frame
definition itself, the authors would like to acknowledge the authors of that
document and the members of the IETF MASQUE working group for their
suggestions. Additionally, the authors would like to thank Martin Thomson for
suggesting the use of an HTTP/3 SETTINGS parameter. Furthermore, the authors
would like to thank Ben Schwartz for writing the first proposal that used two
layers of indirection.
